# CSC190-Assignment-1-solution

Download Here: [CSC190 Assignment 1 solution](https://jarviscodinghub.com/assignment/csc190-assignment-1-solution/)

For Custom/Original Work email jarviscodinghub@gmail.com/whatsapp +1(541)423-7793

1 Objectives
In this assignment, you will implement the Simpson’s method and the adaptive Simpson’s method to compute the deﬁnite integral of a function (i.e. integration over ﬁnite real interval). When directly computing the integral is diﬃcult, numerical integration methods are useful alternatives as these allow you to approximate the result with certain degree of precision. There are three parts in this assignment and each part builds upon the previous parts as follows.
1. You will write a simple function which will be used for evaluating a continuous mathematical relation using existing built-in functions in the math.h library.
2. You will implement a function for performing numerical integration of the relation constructed in the previous part using the Simpson’s method.
3. You will construct another function that performs integration in an adaptive manner in order to reduce the magnitude of error introduced by the general Simpson’s method.
This assignment tests your understanding of basic C syntax (i.e. arrays, loops, selection statements, etc.). As this is your ﬁrst assignment, we have provided ﬁles that you must use as a starting point to complete this assignment. You should download the content of the folder Assignment1 which contains two subfolders (code and expOutput) into your ECF workspace. Folder code contains a skeleton of function implementations and declarations. Your task is to expand these functions appropriately. main.c evokes all the functions you will have implemented and is similar to the ﬁle that will be used to test your implementations. Use main.c ﬁle to test all your implementations. Folder expOutput contains outputs expected for the supplied main.c ﬁle. Note that we will NOT use the same sample ﬁles for grading your assignment. Do NOT change the name of these ﬁles or functions.
2 Grading
It is IMPORTANT that you follow all instructions provided in this assignment very closely. Otherwise, you will lose a signiﬁcant amount of marks as this assignment is mostly auto-marked and relies heavily on you accurately following the provided instructions. Following is the mark composition for this assignment (total of 20 points): • Successful compilation of all program ﬁles i.e. the following command results in no errors (2 points): gcc a1Part1.c a1Part2.c a1Part3.c main.c -lm -o run • Output from Part 1 and 2 exactly matches expected output (2 point each for a total of 4 points) • Output from Part 3 exactly matches the expected output (4 points) • Code content (10 points) Sample expected outputs are provided in folder expOutput. We will test your program with a set of completely diﬀerent data ﬁles. No late submissions are accepted. All submissions after the due date will be assigned a grade of 0/20.
Part 1: Evaluating a continuous function
This part requires you to expand the function f located in the a1Part1.c ﬁle. • One argument x of type float is passed to this function.
1
• This function will return a value of type float. • The polynomial you will implement is f(x) = sin(x) + x10 + (x−1)2 • Please refer to the ﬁle Part1.txt for a sample result from this function. • You can test your implementation of this function using the provided main.c ﬁle. As you are aware from going through the preparation slides, in order to execute this program, all associated functions must be compilable. Hence, ensure that before you test this function that other skeleton functions are at bare minimum compilable. Then, compile all ﬁles using the command supplied in Sec 2. When you examine the main.c ﬁle, you can observe that you must supply to the executable ﬁle the argument ‘1’ to invoke the f function (i.e. execute the program with ./run 1 after compilation).
Part 2: Implementing Numerical Integration using Simpson’s Method
This part is a continuation of Part 1. Here you will implement the function S located in a1Part2.c which numerically integrates the function f in the interval [a,b] (i.e. Rb a f(x)). Numerical integration is used in solvers such as MATLAB in order to evaluate the integral of a function within a speciﬁed interval. The Simpson’s method approximates the integral of a function by evaluating the following expression: Z b a f(x) ≈ b−a 6 (f(a) + 4f(m) + f(b)) (1) where m is the mid-point of the interval [a,b]. The Simpson’s method approximates the function f using a third order polynomial. The error in this approximation is proportional to the fourth derivative evaluated at ε ∈ [a,b] (i.e. f4(ε)). Hence if f is a third order polynomial, there will be no error introduced by this numerical integration. • Two arguments are passed to the function and these are the bounds of integration (i.e. [a,b]). • The function will evaluate and return the approximate value ofRb a f(x) in accordance to Eq. 1. • main.c ﬁle can be used to test your implementation via the command ./run 2. Ensure that your output matches the sample output provided in Part2.txt. You can integrate the expression f by hand. Compute the correct value and check how diﬀerent the result from this function is from the actual value.
Part 3: Adaptive Numerical Integration
As you may have noticed in the previous section, the error in applying the Simpson’s method over a large interval is signiﬁcant. Here you will implement an adaptive version of the Simpson’s method which splits the original interval into smaller halves until the error within each divided interval is lesser than the threshold ?. Then, the Simpson’s method is applied to each one of these intervals and the results are summed. You will adaptively implement this as functions may have high variations in one area and not vary so much in other regions. It is necessary to divide the intervals extensively in the highly varying regions and not so extensively in slowly varying regions. The original interval will be continually divided into half until the current interval satisﬁes: |S(a,m) + S(m,b)−S(a,b)|/15 < ? where S(a,b) is the application of the Simpson’s method to the interval [a,b] and m is the midpoint of the interval [a,b]. At this point, S(a,b) estimates the integral over the sub-interval [a,b] with suﬃcient accuracy and there is no need to further divide [a,b]. Hence, once the error over [a,b] satisﬁes the above threshold, S(a,b) can be applied to obtain the estimate of the integral over [a,b] (i.e. no need to use S(a,m) and S(m,b)). This is repeated throughout the entire original interval. You will implement the function simpsonsAdaptiveIntegration located in a1Part3.c as follows: 2 • Four arguments are supplied to this function and these are the interval of integration [a,b], ? (for the stopping criteria) and the length of the smallest interval allowed (in order to prevent too many iterations). • This function will be implemented iteratively (loops NOT recursion). In the iterative implementation, you will utilize a loop and an array to aid with the iterative division of intervals and evaluation of the integral over these sub-intervals. Note: we will check whether you have used recursion (you will lose all points for this part and code content if this is the case). • Deﬁne a macro called ARRAYSIZE in the a1.h ﬁle which is the size of the array that you will declare in the function simpsonsAdaptiveIntegration that will hold information about the intervals that are yet to be evaluated. • This function will not return any values. It will print the result of applying the adaptive Simpson’s method. Please refer to the ﬁle Part3.txt for the expected formatting of your output. • main.c ﬁle can be used to test your implementation via the command ./run 3. Ensure that your output matches expected output in Part3.txt. You can integrate the expression f by hand. Compute the correct value and check how diﬀerent this result is from the output of the adaptive method. 3 Code Submission 3.1 Checklist ENSURE that your work satisﬁes the following checklist: • You submit before the deadline. • All ﬁles and functions retain the same original names. • Your code compiles without error in the ECF environment (if it does not compile then your maximum grade will be 1/20). • Do not resubmit any ﬁles in Assignment 1 after the deadline (otherwise we will consider your work to be a late submission). 3.2 Submission through submitcsc190s • Log onto your ECF account. • Ensure that your completed code compiles. • Browse into the directory that contains your completed code ( a1.h, a1Part1.c, a1Part2.c, a1Part3.c). • Submit by issuing the command: submitcsc190s 1 a1.h a1Part1.c a1Part2.c a1Part3.c
